A Brief Practice of Consecrating Amṛta for the Vidyādhara Assembly1
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

droom bisho bishuddhé om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung pé dza
bhrūṃ viśva viśuddhe oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra-guru-padma siddhi hūṃ phaṭ jaḥ
dak gi tukka né yeshepa loksu jé té dün gyi ten dang yermé du shyukpa yongsu gyurpa lé
The wisdom deity in my heart separates and remains indivisibly with the front visualization.
tongpé ngang lé lung mé dang
From the state of emptiness arises wind and fire.
töpé gyebu sum gyi teng
Above a skull-cup placed upon a tripod
a lé yeshe kapala
Is the syllable ā, which transforms into a wisdom kapāla.
yang shing gyaché nangkhong su
Within the kapāla’s vast expanse
chakkyu nga dang drönma nga
Are five iron hooks and five lights
rik nga yabyum dru chü tsen
Marked by the ten seed syllables of the male and female deities of the five families.
lung yö mé bar töpa drö
The wind blows and the fire blazes, heating up the skull-cup
kol shying ö du shyuwa lé
And causing the contents to boil and melt into light.
dütsi gyatsor khyilwé ü
In the middle of a swirling ocean of amṛta

podrang shyalmé nyamgawa
Is the delightful palace, beyond measure.
dru shyi go shyi tsennyi den
It is square, with four doors and all other characteristics;
da dön tak sum yongdzokpé
Its symbols, meanings and significance all perfectly complete.
chinang zangtal chenpö ü
Without outside or inside, it is vast, unimpeded clarity.

natsok pema nyidé teng
In its centre, upon a multicoloured lotus, sun and moon, is a Hūṃ,
hung lé kechik dren dzok su
Out of which, perfect in the very moment of envisioning,
daknyi sangye kün gyi ngö
I arise as the actual presence of all the buddhas—2
nangsi zilnön pema jung
The Lotus-Born ‘Prevailing Over All That Appears and Exists’…
Thus, continue to recite the main text up to and including the praise. After that, take hold
of the dhāraṇī-cord and recite the following:
rang gi tuk né ö tröpé
From my heart light radiates forth,
dünkyé lhatsok tukgyü kul
Invoking the deities of the front visualization.
dé lé detong rolpa yi
From the deities limitless rays of light—the play of bliss and emptiness—
özer pakyé khakhyab trö
Radiate and fill the sky.
chok chü gyalwa sé ché dang
All of you victorious ones of the ten directions and your heirs,
tsa gyü rigdzin lamé tsok
Root and lineage masters, hosts of vidyādhara gurus,
yidam shyitro rabjam lha
Personal deities and peaceful and wrathful deities, infinite in number,
né sum pawo naljormé
Heroic ones and yoginīs of the three places—
ku sung tuk kyi yeshe dang
All the wisdom of your enlightened body, speech and mind,
tenyo sishyi dang chü kün
And all the vital essences of existence and peace, animate and inanimate,
dewa chenpö nampar dü
Are/Is gathered here into great bliss.
shyal shyuk ku yi yib gyü né
The nectar enters through their mouths and fills their bodies.
yabyum dé rol jortsam lé
From the point of union of the male and female deities’ blissful play,
char tar bab té chü la tim
It pours down like rain and dissolves into the elixir,
tong tsor nyong rek drolwa yi
Which transforms into great wisdom amṛta
yeshe dütsi chenpor gyur
That liberates upon sight, hearing, taste and touch.
After the recitation of the approach and accomplishment mantras, add this nine syllable mantra
to the main mantra and recite them together:
oṃ vajra-amṛita hūṃ hrīḥ thā
At the end, present the offerings and recite the praise. Expel the obstructive forces with wrathful
mantras and carry out the descent of blessings, causing everything to blaze with splendour.
Generate delight through the wheel of the feast-gathering and confess any mistakes
as is done usually.
The deities of the front visualization melt into light and transform into heaps of amṛta that
liberates on taste.
Recite this, imagining that it happens. Then request the deities to remain, carry out the dissolution
and re-emergence, and recite prayers of dedication, aspiration and auspiciousness.

| Translated by Han Kop and reviewed by Stefan Mang, 2021, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project.
With gratitude to Tulku Dawa Rinpoche for his clarifications.

Source: 'Jigs med gling pa. "rig 'dus bdud rtsi chig sgrub", in klong chen snying thig rtsa
pod. 5 Vols. BDRC W1KG13585. Bodhnath, Kathmandu and Bodhgaya, Bihar: Shechen Publications,
1994. Vol. 4: 77–78.
↑ The Vidyādhara Assembly, the Inner Practice of the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse (Rigdzin
Düpa).↑ This line seems to have been omitted in our Tibetan text.