A Glorious Garland of the Two Accomplishments
An Abridged Feast-Offering for the Female Practice of the Ḍākinī1
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Namo gurubhyaḥ!
In the centre of my heart is the great, indestructible essence,The life-force that accomplishes
the empty bliss beyond transference.To the ḍākinī endowed with the supreme of all aspects,In
the great timelessness beyond past, present, and future, I pay homage!
In order to please an inconceivable amount of ḍākinīs of the outer and inner sacred places who
dwell in the maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī Queen of Great Bliss, you can do this practice,
which I have compiled by abbreviating the elaborate practice. It is particularly convenient
if you want to accumulate the feast offerings.2
Blessing the Offerings
ho, dewa chenpö nö chok tu
Hoḥ! In the wondrous vessel vessel of great bliss
tsok kyi khorlö longchö ni
Are arranged the delights of the feast-offering,
langdor mepé damtsik dzé
The samaya substances that are free from accepting and rejecting.
om ah hung gi dütsir gyur
With oṃ āḥ hūṃ they are transformed into ambrosia.
First Portion
Divide the first portion into three.
hung, womin né dang khachö shying
Hūṃ! The Unsurpassed3 and the other celestial realms,
pawo khandro duwé né
The sacred places where the heroic ones4 and ḍākinīs gather,
nyishu tsashyi trulpé yul
The twenty-four emanated places,
nang tar dorjé pungpö drong
Are inwardly the cities of our vajra body.
chiwor dzalandhara sok
The crown of the head is Jālandhara and so on—
den sum tsangwé kyilkhor na
Dwelling in the maṇḍala of the three seats of completeness,5
shyukpé pawo naljorma
Heroic ones and yoginīs,
khandro dang ni khandroma
Ḍākas and ḍākinīs—
tsok kyi duwar shek su sol
Come and enjoy this feast-offering!
utra tortsuk dem sé dem
Your top-knots swaying,
changlö zarbu talala
Your long tresses swinging to and fro,
nyen cha dubu kyilili
Your earrings, anklets and armlets jingling,
rügyen yerkha trololo
Your bone ornaments rattling, your tiny bells ringing,
chang té'u drilbü dra dang ché
With small skull-drums and bells resounding,
dorjé lu dang gar la rol
Take pleasure in our vajra songs and dances!
döyön longchö tsok su bul
We offer you the enjoyment of these sensory delights as the feast!
damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
We confess our impairments of samaya!
chinang bar chö ying su drol
Liberate outer and inner obstacles into all-encompassing space!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
Recite the hundred syllable mantra.
Dedicating the Remainder
Bless the remainder with:
om akaro mukham sarva dharmanam adyanutpannatota om ah hung pé soha
oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
pem, lhak la wangwé kanyen ni
Peṃ peṃ! All you attendants who share in the remainder and carry out the commands:
khandro sumchu tsa nyi dang
The thirty-two ḍākinīs,
ging chen khyo shuk langka bum
The great kiṃkara with consorts and laṅkā spirits in your hundreds of thousands,
ponya sumgya drukchü dé
The three hundred sixty classes of messengers,
gyokma shyi dang barma gyé
The Four Swift Ones and Eight Blazing Ones,
mamo dün dang singmo shyi
Seven Mātṛkās and Four Sisters,
shukdro né nyul tramen nam
The forceful, roaming and therianthropic spirits—6
lhak la dung shying tsokkhang drim
You who crave leftovers and roam the assembly halls,
pampab zangpo di shyé la
Please accept this excellent remainder!
mitün kyen ngen barché sol
Dispel all unfavourable, negative circumstances and obstacles!
cholwé trinlé drubpar dzö
Accomplish the activities entrusted to you, this is our request!
Take the remainder outside.
Aspiration Prayer
yeshe khandrö drongkhyer du
In the city of the wisdom ḍākinīs,
tsok kyi khorlo korwa yi
Through offering this feast,
dakshyen drowa malüpa
May I and all beings, without exception,
kyilkhor chik tu drubpar shok
Attain realization in one maṇḍala!
This text arose through the blessingOf the Lord of the ḍākinī assembly,Who is indivisible from
the omniscient guru.Fortunate ones, take it to heart!

When I, the vidyādhara monk Pema Gyepe De, was offering more than a thousand feasts to the maṇḍala
of the Female Practice of the Ḍākinī, at Tsogyal Latso lake, the glorious terrestrial
Akaniṣṭha, in Dragda, right there I abbreviated the root text and made this compilation.
May the merit of this become the cause for all beings to be cared for by the celestial Vajra
Queen! Sarva śubhaṃ!

| Translated by Han Kop, 2020.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "yum ka mkha' 'gro'i tshogs mchod pa nye bar bsdus pa grub
gnyis dpal phreng/" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. Gangtok:
Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 16: 85–86
↑ I.e., Yumka Khandro Dechen Gyalmo, the Female Practice of the Ḍākinī Queen of Great Bliss.↑
The elaborate practice is A Glorious Garland of Great Bliss—the Fundamental, Female Practice
of Tsogyal, the Queen of Great Bliss.↑ Skt. Akaniṣṭha↑ Skt vīra; Tib. pawo (dpa’ bo)↑
The three seats are 1) the aggregates (skandha) and elements (dhātu), 2) the sense fields
(āyatana), and 3) limbs (aṅga). In 1) reside the tathāgatas, in 2) reside the male and female
bodhisattvas, and in 3) reside the male and female wrathful deities.↑ Spirits with a
human body and an animal head, Tib. Tramen (phra men).