Rain of Siddhis: A Prayer to the Lineage of Rigdzin Düpa
by the Third Dodrupchen Jikmé Tenpé Nyima

rik gyé wangchuk kunzang dorjé sem
Samantabhadra and Vajrasattva, lords of a hundred buddha families,
drukpé gyaltsab prahé benza dang
Prahevajra,1 regent of Vajradhara,
ngödrub chok nyé jampal shenyen la
Mañjuśrīmitra, you who attained the supreme siddhi,
solwa deb so dorjé yeshe tsol
To you I pray: bestow on me the vajra wisdom!

tulshyuk tarchin khepa shiri seng
The learned Śrī Siṃha, who perfected the yogic disciplines,
zakmé jalü rab drub yeshe do
Jñanasūtra, who attained the immaculate rainbow body,
tekchok nyingpö shingta bimé shyab
Vimalamitra, pioneer of the essence of the supreme yāna,
solwa deb so dorjé yeshe tsol
To you I pray: bestow on me the vajra wisdom!

kyilkhor gyatsö khyabdak pema jung
Padmākara, master over the ocean of maṇḍalas,
jampal trulpa ngadak trisong dang
King Trisong Detsen, emanation of Mañjuśrī,
gangchen münsel bairo tsogyal la
Vairocana and Yeshe Tsogyal, who dispelled the darkness in the Land of Snows,
solwa deb so dorjé yeshe tsol
To you I pray: bestow on me the vajra wisdom!

nyingtik da drol künkhyen drimé ö
Omniscient Drimé Özer,2 who deciphered the secret symbols of the Nyingtik,
zabter kabab rigdzin jikdral ling
Vidyādhara Jigdral Lingpa,3 who was authorized with the transmission of the profound terma,
lhasé dögar kunzang shyenpen shyab
Kunzang Shyenpen,4 emanation of the prince Murum Tsenpo,
solwa deb so dorjé yeshe tsol
To you I pray: bestow on me the vajra wisdom!

dampé dzö dzin gyalwé nyugu dang
Gyalwé Nyugu, holder of the treasury of instructions,
khé dang drubpé khor gyur dongak ling
Dongak Lingpa,5 universal king of learning and practice,
kadrin nyammé tsawé lama la
Root master, in all your incomparable kindness,
solwa deb so dorjé yeshe tsol
To you I pray: bestow on me the vajra wisdom!

gyaltab chiluk wang chü gyü min shying
May my mind be ripened through the anointing water of the vase of royal empowerment,
chi khyé lhakpé damtsik nampar dak
May general, specific and special samayas be completely pure,
tingdzin nga dang gabpa shyi yi né
By perfecting all the crucial points of the five samādhis and four hidden instructions,
yongdzok kyerim zabmö shyi zung té
May the profound generation stage create the foundation,
nyengyü yishyin norbü dzokrim dang
And through the perfection stage of the Wish-Fulfilling Jewel of the Oral Lineage,
ma gom sangye ponyé lam ten né
And the path of the messenger-consort known as Buddhahood Without Meditation,
pung kham dribdral ying su dakpé tsal
May the aggregates and elements be purified into unobstructed space,
ngaden jalü dorjér minpar shok
And ripen into the indestructible rainbow body of five-coloured light!

This prayer to the lineage of Rigdzin Düpa, known as Rain of Siddhis, was composed by the devoted
Jikmé Tenpé Nyima, who knows a little about the meaning of this path. Jayantu!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey and Han Kop, Rigpa Translations. Revised 2017.
↑ Tib. Garab Dorje↑ Longchenpa↑ Jikmé Lingpa↑ The First Dodrupchen, Jigme Trinle Özer (1745–1821)↑
Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo