Song and Dance to Delight the Ḍākas and Ḍākinīs
An Aspiration for the Sixfold Satisfaction of the Feast-Gathering
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

ting ngé dzin gyi trulpé kyilkhor lha
Maṇḍalas of deities emanating from samādhi,
chinang chöpé trin gyi pungpo yi
Are satisfied through cloud-banks of offerings, outer and inner,
zakmé dechen ngang du tsimpé tü
Within undefiled great bliss—through the power of this,
sönam yeshe tsok nyi dzokpar shok
May we complete the two accumulations of merit and wisdom!

nying ü pemé gesar shyepé tser
On the blossoming lotus in the centre of our heart,
rangsem lama yidam yermé pa
Our own mind is inseparable from the guru and yidam—
yeshe dütsi tsimpé jinlab kyi
Through the blessing of satisfying them with wisdom nectar,
nyidzin trulpé küntok ching gyur chik
May all dualistic grasping and deluded thought be securely bound!

chökyong jungpé tsok nam jinyepa
All the hosts of dharma protectors and worldly spirits
nam mang döyön gyatsor khyilwé chi
Are satisfied with the torma of appetizing food and drink,
zacha tungwé tormé tsimpa lé
Which is like a swirling ocean of many kinds of sensory delight —
barché kün sel trinlé drubpar shok
Through this, may the activity of dispelling all obstacles be accomplished!

min jé wang tob dom sum la nepé
May the yogis who have received the ripening empowerments and who abide by the three vows,
naljorpa nam khyepar zawa yi
Be satisfied through the gaṇacakra,
damtsik tsok kyi khorlö tsimpa dang
The samaya of partaking special food and drink,
tingdzin zé la taktu chö gyur chik
And may they always enjoy the sustenance of samādhi!

kyemché lha nam dorjé lugar dang
With the sensory deities1 satisfied through vajra songs and dance,
detong rolmö dra yi nyer tsim né
And the music of bliss and emptiness,
gangshar nangwa lha dang yeshe kyi
May whatever arises dawn as pure perception
dakpé nangwa chik tu charwar shok
In which deity and primordial wisdom are one!

ngö kün dechen lhenchik kyepa yi
Through constant satisfaction in the supreme, co-emergent wisdom
yeshe chok gi taktu tsimpa lé
In which all things arise as great bliss,
khordé yer michepé tiklé ru
May we gain the siddhi of mahāmudrā,
chakgya chenpö ngödrub nye gyur chik
Within the all-encompassing bindu in which saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are inseparable!

dorna chinang kyilkhor khorlo kün
In short, through the power of delighting every level
zakmé tsok kyi duwé nyepé tü
Of all outer and inner maṇḍalas with this undefiled feast,
jikten jikten depé gé lé kyi
May the light of auspiciousness, of sublime and worldly goodness,
tashi nangwé sa sum khyabpar shok
Suffuse the three planes of existence!

These words arose from the ocean-like mind of the one named Youthful Khyentsé.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (trans. Stefan Mang and Peter Woods, ed. Libby Hogg), 2017. Revised
with many thanks to Charles Hastings, 2021.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "tshogs 'khor tshim pa drug ldan gyi smon lam dpa' bo dang
DA ki dgyes pa'i glu gar/" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols.
Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 7: 463–465
↑ A note in one Tibetan edition clarifies that these are the deities of the maṇḍala of one’s
own body.