Source of Magnificent Blessing
A Prayer to the Lineage of the Secret Practice of the Great Compassionate One, Natural Liberation
of Suffering
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

namo gurave
Namo gurave.
chimé tokmé gönpo ö tayé
Amitāyus, immortal and primordial protector,
nyingjé daknyi pakchok chenrezik
Avalokiteśvara, noble and supreme embodiment of compassion,
zungjuk trulpé namrol tsokyé jer
And the display of union, the emanated Lake-born Lord1—
solwa deb so ngödrub nam nyi tsol
To you I pray: grant me the two types of accomplishment!

khachö daki tsomo tsogyal yum
Consort Tsogyal, queen of celestial ḍākinīs,
jampal yang ngö trisong de’utsen
King Tri Songdetsen, Mañjuśrī in person,
künkhyen chöjé drimé özer la
Drimé Özer2, Omniscient Lord of Dharma—
solwa deb so ngödrub nam nyi tsol
To you I pray: grant me the two types of accomplishment!

terchen chö kyi gyalpo jikme ling
Jigme Lingpa, great treasure-revealer and Dharma King,
chak na pemo gyalwé nyugü shyab
Gyalwe Nyugu. Holder of the Lotus,3
gyü sol kündü tsawé lama la
Root master, who embodies all lineages and traditions,
solwa deb so ngödrub nam nyi tsol
To you I pray: grant me the two types of accomplishment!

detar solwa tabpé jinlab kyi
Through the blessings of praying in this way,
ngejung changchub sem nyi rabgyé shing
May my renunciation and bodhicitta increase,
mindrol zabmö tabkhé la ten né
And through my skill in the profound means of ripening and liberation,
zungjuk pakpé gopang nyur tob shok
May I swiftly attain the state of union, the level of the Noble One.

While turning the wheel of the feast-offering for this very same Natural Liberation of Suffering
maṇḍala more than a hundred times in the Hayagrīva temple of Samye,4 I, Jigpa Mepé Dé,
made this prayer of whatever came to mind. Siddhirastu!

| Translated by Han Kop, 2019.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "sdug bsngal rang grol brgyud 'debs" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen
brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 16: 25
↑ I.e., Padmasambhava.↑ I.e., Longchenpa.↑ I.e., Avalokiteśvara in person.↑ Tamdrin Ling is
one of the eight major temples surrounding the main temple of Samye.