Supplement to the Longchen Nyingtik Lineage Prayer
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

drub nyé jikme gyalwé nyugü shyab
The accomplished Jigme Gyalwe Nyugu;
trulpé ku chok mingyur namkhé tsen
Supreme nirmāṇakāya named Mingyur Namkha;
solwa deb so neluk rang shyal tön
To you I pray: Show me my true nature, my original face!

heruka pal yeshe dorjé dang
Glorious heruka, Yeshe Dorje;
gyalwé sepo shyenpen pa tayé
Son of the buddhas, Shenpen Thaye, whose benefit to others is unlimited;
khenchen lama pema benza la
And the great khenpo, Lama Pema Vajra:
solwa deb so khyen nyi gyepar dzö
To you I pray: Cause my twofold knowledge to expand!

tsokyé lama khyentsé wangpö shyab
Lake-born guru, noble Khyentse Wangpo;
künkhyen jikme tenpé nyima jé
All-knowing lord Jigme Tenpé Nyima;
rigdzin chenpo natsok rangdrol la
And great vidyādhara Natsok Rangdrol:
solwa deb so dak gyü jingyi lob
To you I pray: Inspire me with your blessings!
Continue with "Through true renunciation and disgust for saṃsāra... etc."1
This is the lineage that Khenpo Pema Dorje received from Jigme Gyalwe Nyugu, the Fourth Dzogchen,
Khyentse Yeshe Dorje and Gyalse Shenpen Thaye. It was from Khenpo Pema Dorje that Khyentse
Rinpoche then received the entire Longchen Nyingtik.
The lineage of ultimate realization needs to go from Trama Jigme Gyalwe Nyugu to Khyentse Rinpoche.
Thus:
drub nyé jikme gyalwé nyugü shyab
The accomplished Jigme Gyalwe Nyugu;
dorjé chang chen jamyang khyentsé la
Great Vajradhara Jamyang Khyentse:
solwa deb so gonggyü jinlab tsol
To you I pray: Bestow the blessings of the lineage of realization!

künkhyen jikme tenpé nyima dang
All-knowing Jigme Tenpé Nyima;
rigdzin chenpo natsok rangdrol shyab
Great vidyādhara Natsok Rangdrol:
dömé gönpo tsawé lama la
And the primordial protector, my own root guru,
solwa deb so neluk rang shyal tön
To you I pray: Show me my true nature, my original face!
It is good to recite this version. It is also convenient to visualize the tiered arrangement
of the sources of refuge in this way.
This was transcribed from the master’s handwriting.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "klong chen snying thig gi brgyud 'debs/" in ’Jam dbyangs
chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol.
3: 401–402

Version: 1.2-20220118
↑ See https://www.lotsawahouse.org/tibetan-masters/jigme-lingpa/longchen-nyingtik-lineage-prayer