The Shower of Great Bliss
A Prayer to the Lineage of the Female Awareness-Holder (Yumka)
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

shyi ying khyechö drukden kuntuzang
The all-pervading space of the ground, endowed with six special features, is Samantabhadra.
shyi nang yeshe rolpa dorjé sem
The ground’s manifestation, wisdom’s display, is Vajrasattva.
shyi drol dömé lam tön garab jer
The one who reveals the path of the ground’s primordial freedom is Garab Dorje.
solwa deb so dechen yeshe tsol
To you I pray: grant me the wisdom of great bliss!

ösal jampal dorjé shenyen shyab
Mañjuśrīmitra—‘Friend of Mañjuvajra Luminosity’,
ösal nang shyi tar sön shri sim ha
Śrī Siṃha, who perfected the four visions of luminosity,
ösal ying kyi gyen zik yeshedor
Jñānasūtra, who saw the luminosity that is an adornment of basic space—
solwa deb so dechen yeshe tsol
To you I pray: grant me the wisdom of great bliss!

chimé po chen ku nyé bimala
Vimalamitra, who gained the immortal body of great transference,1
chimé drubpé lobpön tötreng tsal
Master Mighty Skull Garland,2 who attained immortality,
chimé neluk ngöngyur trisong jer
King Trisong Detsen, who actualized the immortal natural state—
solwa deb so dechen yeshe tsol
To you I pray: grant me the wisdom of great bliss!

dechen chöku kuntuzangmo dang
Great bliss is the reality body, Samantabhadrā,
detong longku dorjé tsünmö ngö
And bliss-emptiness is the enjoyment body, the Vajra Queen in actuality.
demchok gyal kün kyé yum tsogyalmar
Supreme bliss is the mother of all the buddhas, Yeshe Tsogyal.
solwa deb so dechen yeshe tsol
To you I pray: grant me the wisdom of great bliss!

dorjé lü kyi neyul durtrö na
In the vajra body’s sacred places and lands, and charnel grounds,
dorjé shying ngak lhenchik kyepé zuk
Reside the vajra forms of field-born, mantra-born and innate ḍākinīs.
dorjé den sum tsangwé kyilkhor la
To the vajra-maṇḍala of the three seats of completeness
solwa deb so dechen yeshe tsol
I pray: grant me the wisdom of great bliss!

rik chik zungjuk nyukmé yeshe ni
Playful emanation of the single family, the genuine wisdom of union,
rik nam natsok tro dang duwé gar
From whom various families emanate and into whom they’re re-absorbed.
rik künkhyab dak jikdral lingpa la
Jigdral Lingpa,3 lord who presides over every buddha family—
solwa deb so dechen yeshe tsol
To you I pray: grant me the wisdom of great bliss!

sang sum yeshe charwé kyilkhor du
In the maṇḍala where the three secrets arise as wisdom
kham sum tsowö chak jé dömé gön
Is the Primordial Protector who is honoured by the leaders of the three realms.
dü sum rigdzin tsa gyü lama la
To the vidyādhara root and lineage masters of the three times,
solwa deb so dechen yeshe tsol
I pray: grant me the wisdom of great bliss!

detar miché güpé soltab tü
Through the power of praying with unwavering devotion in this way, bless me so that
daljor nyé ka namchi ngemé dren
I may recall the difficulty of gaining freedoms and advantage and the uncertainty of the time
of death,
lé dré lumé panglang nying la shar
The infallibility of karmic cause and effect and a knowledge of what to adopt and avoid may
arise within my heart.
chömin ngejung jongwar jingyi lob
And I may come to master uncontrived renunciation!

changchub sem nyi dütsi yi len ching
With my mind moistened by the nectar of twofold bodhicitta,
lamé mögü dön gyi gyüpa zin
In devotion to the guru, I take on the ultimate transmission.
min jé wang tob damtsik dompa la
Having received ripening empowerments and taken on samayas,
sung dom tsulshyin nüpar jingyi lob
May I be inspired with the ability to properly maintain them!

chir nang dorjé tsünmö shying du dak
Inspire me so that whatever appears is purified as the realm of the Vajra Queen,
dra drak dorjé na dé yang su dzok
Sound is perfected as the melody of vajra-nāda,4
toktsok dorjé namkhé kyil tabü
And thoughts mature as great primordial wisdom,
yeshe chenpor minpar jingyi lob
Which is like the indestructible sphere of space.

nekab duwa sum gyi tendrel drik
Bless me so that temporarily the interdependent circumstances for the three gatherings come
together5
barwa sum dang khyen nyi terdzö dol
And the treasury of three blazings6 and two wisdoms is unlocked.
drubchen gyé dang trinlé nampa shyi
Thus may I effortlessly attain the eight great accomplishments
ngödrub delak drubpar jingyi lob
And master the four types of enlightened activity.

tartuk tsa lung tiklé umar tim
Bless me so that ultimately the channels, wind-energies and essences dissolve into the central
channel,
kadak dömé yeshe ngön du gyur
Bringing realization of the wisdom of primordial alpha-purity,
lhündrub ösal dorjé seng lam né
And, on the secret, indestructible path of spontaneously present luminosity,
zungjuk gopang drubpar jingyi lob
I may attain the level of union!

The sovereign lord of incomparable kindness, guru Choktrul Rinpoche, with his vast vision that
knows all things, commanded me, the vidyādhara monk Dorje Tukchok Tsal, to write this,
and so merely not to refuse him, I wrote this down and prayed. Siddhir-astu. Sarvadā-maṅgalam!

| Translated by Han Kop with the kind assistance of Tulku Dawa Zangpo, and edited by Barry Cohen,
for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2020.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "rig 'dzin yum bka'i brgyud 'debs bde chen char 'bebs/" in
gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980.
Vol. 16: 83–84
↑ The ‘Rainbow Body of Great Transference’ (Tib. 'ja lus 'pho ba chen po) is an accomplishment
of the practice of ‘direct-crossing’ or Tögal whereby the master dissolves his or her body
into rainbow light and lives for centuries in order to benefit others.↑ I.e., Padmasambhava.↑
I.e., Jigme Lingpa.↑ Nāda means sound.↑ The three gatherings are the gathering of
people during the day, the gathering of ḍākinīs during the night, and the gathering of sustenance
at all times.↑ The three blazings are: your body will become blissful, your speech
powerful, and realization will dawn in your mind