The Visualization of the Four Goddesses of the Great Compassionate One, Natural Liberation of
Suffering
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

After the following line in the sādhana,
chok shyir pema dab shyi den tengdu
In the four cardinal directions, and each seated on a four-petalled lotus, are:
Add the following:
shar du jetsün drolma kudok kar
In the East is Venerable Tārā, her body white in colour.
chak yé chok jin utpal karpo dang
Her right hand is in the mudrā of supreme generosity and holds a white Utpala flower.
yönpé nyamshyak chimé tsebum dzin
Her left hand rests in the mudrā of equipoise and holds a long life vase of immortality.
shyab nyi sem mé kyilmo trung gi shyuk
Her two legs are in the bodhisattva’s cross-legged posture.

lho ru özer chen ma ser gyi dok
In the South is Mārīcī, yellow in colour.
shyab nyi dortab shyitrö nyam dangden
Her two feet are in striding posture and her expression is semi-wrathful.
shyal chik zur shyal gyendu zikpé tsul
She has one face and from the corner of her eyes she looks upwards.
chak nyi norbu nyidé shyakpa deng
Her two hands hold aloft a jewel and a sun and moon lasso.

nub tu kurukullé pé rak dang
In the West is magnetizing Kurukullā, ruby red in colour.
shyal chik chak shyi shyab nyi kyangkum shyuk
She has one face and four hands, with one leg is bent and the other outstretched.
tsa chak pema marpö dashyu kang
Her main hands hold aloft a bow and arrow of lotus flowers,
lhakma nam nyi chakkyu shyakpa deng
Her remaining two an iron hook and a lasso.

jang du nor gyün lhamo kudok jang
In the North is the Lady Vasudhārā, green in colour.
yishyin döpa jowé ter bum teng
She stands upon a wish-fulfilling treasure vase, which grants all one can wish for.
shyal chik chak nyi shyab nyi nyam tab shyeng
She has one face, two hands, and is standing upright on her two feet.
chak yé norbu yönpé né'u lé dzin
Her right hand holds a jewel, her left a mongoose.
Then continue with the main text:
kün kyang rang rang gyen dang chaluk dzok
Their ornaments and garments are perfectly complete, each in their own respective style…

| Translated by Han Kop, for the Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2020.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "sdug bsngal rang grol sems ma bzhi'i mngon rtogs/" in gsung
'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980.
Vol. 16: 27

Version: 1.2-20211208