Concise Daily Practice of the Wrathful Guru Takhyung Barwa
by Chatral Rinpoche

Oṃ svasti!  For those who wish to engage in an abbreviated daily practice of the yoga of the
wrathful Takhyung Barwa, they should begin with:
chok chü kyabyul tamché drakpo ta khyung barwé kyilkhor gyi khorlö nampar benza sa ma dza
All objects of refuge within the ten directions appear as the maṇḍala of the wrathful Takhyung
Barwa.  Vajra samājaḥ.
With this, arouse the mandala.
namo, dak dang tayé semchen kün
Namo. I and all the infinite sentient beings
chok sum ngowo lama dang
Take refuge in the guru, the essence of the Three Jewels,
drakpo ta khyung kyilkhor la
And in the maṇḍala of the wrathful Takhyung,
nying né depé kyab su chi
With faith from the bottom of our hearts.
Reciting this three times, go for refuge.
ho, drakpö kyilkhor dir shyuk né
Ho. Having entered into this wrathful maṇḍala,
pama dro druk semchen kün
So that all fatherly and motherly sentient beings in the six paths of rebirth
tsemé nyingjé drolwé chir
May be liberated through immeasurable compassion,
mönjuk döndam changsem kyé
I will generate the aspirational, engaging, and ultimate bodhicitta.
Reciting this three times, generate the enlightened mind.
ho, yeshe ying lé trulpé lhar
Ho. To the deity emanated from the expanse of primordial wisdom,
chaktsal chö bul nyé drib shak
I pay homage, make offerings, and confess my transgressions.
gé la yi rang chökhor kul
I rejoice in virtue, urge you to turn the wheel of Dharma,
takpar shyuk sol gé tsok kün
And request you to abide permanently.  All my collected merit,
lamé chöying chenpor ngo
I dedicate toward the great unexcelled dharmadhātu.
Reciting thus, accumulate the collections of merit.  Then,
dza hung bam ho
With dzaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ, all objects of refuge dissolve into me.
Main Practice:
hrih, namtar sumden tongpanyi
Hrīḥ.  From emptiness endowed with the three aspects of liberation,
ma tok trulpé semchen la
Toward all unrealized, deluded sentient beings,
mikmé nyingjé chenpö dang
Non-referential great compassion shines forth.
namkhé gar khyab pema ö
The extent of space is the realm of Lotus Light.
durtrö rolpé shyalmé khang
The immeasurable palace displays as a charnel ground,
nampar jangwé chö nam dzok
Complete with all phenomena of total purity.
dé ü pema nyida dang
In its center, upon a lotus, sun-, and moon-disc,
marikpé gyur tendrel dön
Are the demons of dependent origination produced by ignorance,
dukdrul chunyi nolwé teng
In the form of twelve poisonous snakes coiled together; above that,
rangrig hrih mar yong gyurpé
Self-awareness in the form of a red hrīḥ completely transforms
jikjé dorjé drowolö
Into the fearsome Dorje Drowo Lö.
shyaldang chetsik shyab nyi dré
His mouth open with fangs bared, he stands with two legs spread apart.
kudok marpo sang pö ting
His body is red, and he wears a deep blue gown,
taksham rügyen tötreng ji
A tiger skirt, bone ornaments, and a splendid garland of skulls.
tökam ugyen ralpé seb
He wears a crown of dried skulls, and amidst his long locks of hair
ta go jang shyur khyung dong mar
A green horse's head emerges upright, topped by a red-faced garuḍa.
chak yé dorjé yön mé khyung
His right hand holds a vajra and his left holds a flaming garuḍa.
bapü buga tamché kyang
All the pores on his body
khyung gi tsatsa tam shing tro
Are also filled with garuḍas that radiate out like sparks,
nöjé dé gyé talwar lak
Pulverizing all of the eight classes of harmful beings.
yeshe mepung long na ji
He shines splendidly amidst a mass of flames of primordial wisdom.
tsok gyé lé gyur marik dön
The demons of ignorance that arise from the eight consciousnesses,
luchen gyepo dar shyin dü
In the form of the eight great nāgas, bow trembling before him.
tsowö chi drin nyingga ru
At the crown, throat, and heart-center of the lord
jampal ku dang pema sung
Are the body of Mañjuśrī (Yamāntaka), the speech of the Lotus family (Hayagrīva),
yangdak dorjé tötrak dzin
And Yangdak (Heruka), each holding a vajra and skull-cup filled with blood,
ku sung tuk kyi yigé tsen
Marked respectively with the syllables of body, speech, and mind.
chö kyi chakgyé özer lé
Light rays radiate from them, the mudrā of dharma,
lhar nang yeshe chakgya ché
And the great mudrā of primordial wisdom, the apparent deities,
lé kyi chakgya shyi drang né
Are drawn in by the four mudrās of activity,
damtsik chakgyar yermé tim
Dissolving inseparably into me, the mudrā of samaya.
tukkar nyi kyil hung gi tar
At my heart-center, surrounding a hūṃ-syllable upon a sun-disc,
ngak treng galmé shyindu khor
The mantra-chain rotates like a firebrand,
özer metak tabu dang
Emitting rays of light like sparks of fire,
khyung gi tsatsé lokdren sek
And emanating garuḍas like sparks, which burn all negative forces,
také tserwé tongsum yo
And resounding with the neighing cry of the horse, which shakes the entire universe.
nöchü jang né rang la tim
Purifying the world and its inhabitants, the light rays dissolve into me,
lhar nang chakgya chenpö ngang
Appearing as the deity in the state of the Great Mudrā.
om ah hung maha guru artsik nirtsik hrih hung trom pé
oṃ āh hūṃ mahā guru artsik nirtsik hrīḥ hūṃ trom phaṭ
Thus, recite the mantra.  Finally, at the end of the session:
ho, chu lé chubur dolwa shyin
Ho.  Like bubbles bursting from water,
rang lé trulwé kyilkhor lha
The deities of the maṇḍala emanated from me
yeshe ying su benza mu
Dissolve within the expanse of primordial wisdom.  Vajra mu.
jetob gyumé lha kur dang
In post-meditation, all arises as the illusory form of the deity.
Thus, dissolve the visualization:
ho, dü sum sakpé getsa kün
Ho.  All virtuous roots that I have accumulated within the three times
namkhyen dömé gyu ru ngo
I dedicate as causes for realizing primordial omniscience.
dak sok düpar chepa nam
May I and all others gathered here
tsombu chik tu sangye shok
Attain Buddhahood as a single group.
Thus, dedicate merit and make aspirations.
hung, gek pa jikrung lama drakpö ku
Hūṃ.  The body of the wrathful guru is charming, heroic, and fearsome.
gö shé drakshul tachok rolpé sung
His speech, the display of Hayagrīva, is laughing, scolding, and fierce.
nyingjé ngam shyi yeshe khyung gi tuk
His mind of the garuḍa of primordial wisdom is compassionate, awesome, and peaceful.
lokdren dulwé lha yi tashi shok
May the deity who tames all negative forces bring auspiciousness!
Thus, with proclamations of auspiciousness, enter into your daily conduct.

So that the important points of practice can be easily implemented, this was composed by Chatral
Sangye Dorje at Zangyak Namkha Dzong in the Guru's sacred accomplishment site of Drakmar.
Jayantu.  Sarvadā mangalaṃ.

| Translated by Josh Capitanio and edited for Lotsawa House, 2019.