The Vajra Lute
A Brief Fulfilment for the Guru Practice of Vidyādhara-Assembly, from the Heart Essence of the
Vast Expanse
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Namo Guru Padmākarāya!
If you wish to practise a brief fulfilment and confession for the Guru Practice of Vidyādhara-Assembly,
do as follows. During the feast-gathering, after having completed the liberation
offering, bless the fulfilment substances with the sky-treasury mantra and mudrā.
nama sarva tathagaté bayo bisho mukhebé sarva takham utgaté saparana imam gagana kham soha
namaḥ sarva-tathāgatebhyo viśva-mukhebhyaḥ sarvathā-khaṃ udgate spharaṇa imaṃ gagana-khaṃ svāhā
ah, chöying khyabdal ösal gyumé trul
Āḥ! From the all-pervading space of reality arise the illusory manifestations of luminosity.
nangwé ngö kün pema drawé shying
All appearance and reality is the Lotus Net pure realm.1
sipé zungdzin yeshe ö ngé long
The duality of existence is the expanse of the five wisdom lights.
changchub sem kyi norbü shyalmé khang
The immeasurable palace of the jewel-like awakened mind is perfect and complete,
köpa rabdzok ngotsar samyé ü
Marvellous and inconceivable.

paklam gyeden nyerchö rolmö dra
In its centre are the customary offerings such as music, representing the eightfold path of
noble ones,
parol chinpa druk dzok döyön trin
Offering clouds of sensory delights, the six transcendent perfections completed,
chudruk ga ter dorje rik ma dang
The vajra consorts who bestow the sixteen blisses,
jordrol zungjuk men rak balingta
Medicine, rakta, and bali—union, liberation, and their indivisibility,
detong rolpa tsok kyi longchö sok
And the enjoyments of the feast, which are the play of bliss and emptiness—
kuntuzangpö namtar lé jungwé
Just like the offering clouds of Samantabhadra
shyingkham rabjam gangwé chötrin di
They fill infinite realms. With all these:

ngowo kadak shyönnu bumpé ying
Primordial purity of the essence, the space of the youthful vase body—
chöku kunzang yabyum tukdam kang
Dharmakāya Samantabhadra and consort, may your wishes be fulfilled!

rangshyin lhündrub dechen yeshe trin
Spontaneous presence of the nature, clouds of the wisdom of great bliss—
longku garab dorje tukdam kang
Sambhogakāya Garab Dorjé, may your wishes be fulfilled!

tukjé rigdzin düpé tsok kyi jé
Compassion arising as the Vidyādhara-Assembly’s Lord of the feast—
tulku nangsi zilnön tukdam kang
Nirmāṇakāya Subduer of all Appearance and Existence,2 may your wishes be fulfilled!

kyilkhor tsowo dorje lobpön tsul
Chiefs of the maṇḍala in the guise of vajra masters—
chok gi rigdzin gyé kyi tukdam kang
Eight supreme vidyādharas, may your wishes be fulfilled!

drubpa chenpö dzutrul chiryang tön
Through your great accomplishment you demonstrate various miracles—
tuksé jebang nyerngé tukdam kang
Lord and subjects, the twenty-five heart-disciples, may your wishes be fulfilled!

shyi gyé wang drak lé kün tokmé drub
You who accomplish unhindered the peaceful, enriching, magnetizing, and wrathful activities—
go kyong gingchen dé shyi tukdam kang
Armies of four great kiṃkara door-keepers, may your wishes be fulfilled!

shyenyang mindrol jinlab trinpung trik
In addition, amassed like clouds of blessing of ripening and liberation
gyü sum rigdzin lamé tukdam kang
Are the vidyādhara gurus of the three transmissions; may your wishes be fulfilled!

ngödrub nam nyi char shyin beb dzepé
You who bestow the ordinary and supreme accomplishments, like a shower of rain—
yidam shyitro rabjam tukdam kang
Infinite peaceful and wrathful deities, may your wishes be fulfilled!

naljor drokdze trinlé tamché drub
You who support the yogis and accomplish all activities—
pawo khandrö tsok kyi tukdam kang
Hosts of heroic ones and ḍākinīs, may your wishes be fulfilled!

leknyé tangdzin ka dang tenpa kyong
You who judge good and bad and protect the precepts and the teaching—
chösung damchen gyatsö tukdam kang
Ocean-like Dharma protectors bound by your oaths, may your wishes be fulfilled!

dögü jorpa yishyin tsol dzepa
You who bestow all the wealth that can be wished for—
nöjin norlha terdak tukdam kang
Yakṣas, gods of wealth and custodians of the treasures, may your wishes be fulfilled!

dorna samyé gyutrul drawa yi
In short, hosts of deities of the maṇḍala
kyilkhor lhatsok yongdzok tukdam kang
Of the inconceivable Magical Net, may your wishes be fulfilled!

tukdam kang gyur nyamchak zöpar shyé
Having fulfilled your wishes, please forgive our impairments and breakages!
tendzin shyabten shedrub tenpa dar
Prolong the lives of the holders of the teaching and cause the teachings of study and practice
to flourish!
dro kün dekyi chö tün paljor gyé
Increase the happiness and prosperity of all beings, in accordance with the Dharma,
choktün ngödrub drubpé trinlé dzö
And enact your enlightened activity of granting the accomplishments, ordinary and supreme!
Recite the hundred-syllable mantra.

As a result of the persistent requests of some enthusiastic students, Pema Ösal Dongak Lingpé
Dé, the servant who delights the omniscient guru, wrote down whatever came to mind. May
virtue and excellence abound! Sarva-maṅgalaṃ.

| Translated by Han Kop and reviewed by Stefan Mang. Edited by Corinne and Dan Ewen, for the
Longchen Nyingtik Project, 2020.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "rig 'dus skong bsdus rdo rje'i rgyud mang/" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen
brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 15:
557–559
↑ That is Padmajāla, the pure realm of Guru Padmasambhava.
↑ i.e., Padmasambhava.