Transference: Enlightenment Without Meditation
from The Heart-Essence of the Vast Expanse
compiled by Patrul Rinpoche1

emaho
Emaho!
rangnang lhündrub dakpa rabjam shying
My entire perception, spontaneously perfect, is a realm of infinite purity,2
köpa rabdzok dewachen gyi shying
The realm of Great Bliss, arrayed in complete and perfect detail. Here,
rangnyi shyilü dorjé naljorma
My own body is Vajrayoginī,
shyal chik chak nyi mar sal dri tö dzin
With one face and two hands, brilliant red and holding hooked knife and skull,
shyab nyi dortab chen sum namkhar zik
My two feet gracefully poised, my three eyes gazing into the sky.

dé yi khong ü tsa uma
In the middle of her body runs the central channel
bom tra da nyuk tsampa la
As thick as a hollow reed arrow,
tong sal ö kyi bugu chen
Empty and clear like a tube of light.
yar né tsang buk né su har
Its upper end is open at the brahma-aperture,
mar né té wo zukpa yi
And its lower end extends below the navel centre.
nyingkhar tsik gi chépé teng
Upon the notch at the heart-centre,
lung gi tiklé jang kyé ü
In the centre of a light green sphere of inner air (lung)
rikpa hrih yik marpor sal
Awareness clearly appears as a red syllable Hrīḥ.
chiwor tru gang tsam gyi teng
A forearm’s length above the crown of one’s head
sangyé nangwa tayé ni
Appears the Buddha Amitābha, ‘Limitless Light’,
tsen pé dzokpé pungpor sal
Complete with all the major and minor marks.
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye gönpo ö pak tu mepa la chaktsal
lo | chö do | kyab su chi o
Blessed One, Thus Gone One, Arhat, completely perfect Buddha, protector Amitābha, I pay homage
to you. I make offerings to you. I take refuge in you.
Recite the homage to Amitābha seven times.
emaho
Emaho!
né rang nang dön gyi womin na
In the self-appearing realm, the ultimate Akaniṣṭha,
yi dé gyé ja gur trikpé long
Is an expanse that teems with rainbow light of intense devotion.
kyap kundü tsawé lama ni
Here, the embodiment of all objects of refuge, one’s own root guru,
ku tamal ma yin dangmé lü
In an extraordinary form and with a radiant body,
pal sangyé nang té ngowor shyuk
Abides as the essence of Buddha Amitābha.
yi mö gü dungwé solwa dep
With intense devotion, we pray:
lam powa jongwar chin gyi lop
Inspire us to accomplish the path of transference!
né womin dröpar chin gyi lop
Inspire us to reach the realm of Akaniṣṭha!
ying chö küi gyal sa zinpar shok
May we capture the domain of dharmakāya expanse!
Recite this three times.
hrih hrih hrih hrih hrih
hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ
hik hik hik
hik hik hik
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye gönpo ö pak tu mepa la chaktsal
lo | chö do | kyab su chi o
Blessed One, Thus Gone One, Arhat, completely perfect Buddha, protector Amitābha, I pay homage
to you. I make offerings to you. I take refuge in you.
Recite the homage to Amitābha seven times.
sangye öpakmé la chaktsal lo
Buddha Amitābha, I prostrate to you;3
orgyen pema jungné la solwa deb
Padmasambhava of Uḍḍiyāna, I pray to you;
drinchen tsawé lamé tukjé zung
Kind root teacher, hold me with your compassion!
tsawar gyüpé lamé lam na drong
Root and lineage gurus, guide me along the path.
zablam powa jongwar jingyi lob
Inspire me to master the profound path of transference.
nyurlam powé khachö dröpar jingyi lob
Inspire me to take this short path of transference to a celestial realm.
dak sok di né tsé pö gyur ma tak
Inspire me and others, so that as soon as this life is over,
dewachen du kyewar jingyi lob
We may take rebirth in the realm of Sukhāvatī!
hrih hrih hrih hrih hrih
hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ
hik hik hik
hik hik hik
chomdendé deshyin shekpa drachompa yangdakpar dzokpé sangye gönpo ö pak tu mepa la chaktsal
lo | chö do | kyab su chi o
Blessed One, Thus Gone One, Arhat, completely perfect Buddha, protector Amitābha, I pay homage
to you. I make offerings to you. I take refuge in you.
Recite the homage to Amitābha seven times.
emaho, shintu ngotsar öpakmé gön dang
Emaho! Most wondrous protector Amitābha,4
tukjé chenpo chakdor tuchen tob
Great Compassionate One and Vajrapāṇi-Mahāsthāmaprāpta,
dak sok tsechik yi kyi solwa deb
For myself and others I pray to you one-pointedly:
zablam powa jongwar jingyi lob
Inspire us to master the profound path of transference.
dak sok namshyik chiwé dü jung tsé
Inspire us, so that, when it comes time for us to die,
namshé dechen powar jingyi lob
Our consciousness may be transferred to the realm of Great Bliss!
Recite this three times.
hrih hrih hrih hrih hrih
hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ hrīḥ
hik hik hik
hik hik hik
pé pé pé pé pé
phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ phaṭ
May all be auspicious! May virtue and goodness abound!
om amarani jiwantiyé soha
oṃ amaraṇi jīvantaye svāhā ||

| Translated by Adam Pearcey and Han Kop, 2020.

Version: 1.2-20211018
↑ This compilation is based on Patrul Rinpoche’s instructions found in The Words of My Perfect
Teacher (kun bzang bla ma’i zhal lung).↑ This section is taken from the Heart-Essence of
the Vast Expanse preliminary practices.↑ Patrul Rinpoche mentions that this is a condensed
transference prayer called ‘Inserting the Grass-stalk’, written by the treasure revealer
Nyida Sangye (14th century).↑ Patrul Rinpoche mentions that this transference prayer is
from the Sky Dharma (Namchö) of Mingyur Dorje (1645–1667).