Words of the Vajra Queen: An Essential Daily Practice of the Vidyādharas’ Female Practice
by Dodrupchen Jikmé Tenpé Nyima

Namo jñānasāgarāya1
When the Great Perfection’s Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse was deciphered, a unique part
of the teachings of the sky treasury was the Vidyādharas’ Female Practice of Dhātviśvarī.
She is the Queen of Great Bliss and mistress of the vajra ḍākinīs. Here I have condensed her
root sādhana, the Glorious Blissful Garland, into a daily practice.
Those who wish to practise her should begin with prayers to the root and lineage gurus:
gang gi drin gyi dechen nyi
You are the one whose kindness
kechik nyi la charwa gang
Can bring great joy in an instant,
lama rinchen tabü ku
The guru in jewel-like form,
dorjé chen shyabpé la dü
Vajra holder, at your feet I bow!
Refuge and Bodhicitta
namo, gyalyum dorjé pakmo la
Namo! Mother of all the buddhas, Vajravārāhī,
dudral mepar kyab su chi
In you, I take refuge, beyond union and separation.
chokri dralwé semchen nam
I will lead all beings, impartially,
dechen sa la göpar gyi
To the state of great bliss.
Three times.
The Main Part: Meditating on the Visualization of the Ḍākinī
ah, nangwa tamché yum ngé long
Āḥ! All that appears is the expanse of the five mothers.
sipa tamché khandrö dal
All that exists is the circle of the ḍākinīs.
gyukyen lé dé shyalyé khang
The celestial palace is beyond cause and condition:
tiklé nyakchik chöying go
The single entrance symbolises the single sphere2 of all-pervading space.
dechen barwé podrang ü
In the centre of the palace blazing with great bliss,
chukyé gesar shyepé teng
Upon the heart of a blossoming lotus
nyimé den la khandrö tso
And a sun-disc seat, stands the foremost of the ḍākinīs:
chökü long na kunzangmo
In the expanse of dharmakāya she is Samantabhadrī,
longkü shying na warahi
In the sambhogakāya realm she is Vajravārāhī,
tulku yeshe tsogyalma
And in nirmāṇakāya form she is Yeshe Tsogyal.
shyal chik chak nyi kudok mar
She has one face and two hands; her body is red in colour.
chermo nyampé dortab chen
She is naked, standing in the posture of equanimity, yet ready to act.
shintu chak dang shyepé shyal
Passionate and smiling,
chak yé töpé chang te’u
In her right hand she holds a small skull-drum3
nyen gyi tekar tö ching trol
That is raised and played close to her ear.
yönpa driguk yuwa ni
In her left hand she holds a hooked knife, the handle
ku la ten né chok du gying
Resting on her hip; her bearing is imposing and graceful.
bhaga gyé shing numa bur
Her bhaga is expanded and her breasts swell.
rinpoché dang shyönnü gyen
She is adorned with jewels and youth-ornaments;
pundariké doshal chang
And wears a garland of white lotus flowers.4
rüpé gyen druk ku la dzé
The six bone ornaments adorn her body,5
nak num utré lentsar chen
Her black, glistening hair is plaited,
rinpoché yi tsé dren ji
And her jewelled diadem shines majestically.
umé chen ni ying la zik
Her central eye gazes into all-encompassing space.
longkü chen gyi drowa dul
Her sambhogakāya eye tames beings.
tulkü chen gyi kham sum guk
Her nirmāṇakāya eye summons the three realms.
ku la gyüdé kyilkhor dzok
In her body the maṇḍalas of all the classes of tantra are perfectly complete.
bumtrak yangpé khandrö kor
She is surrounded by a vast assembly of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs.
rikdak pema tötreng tsal
The lord of the families is Mighty Lotus with Skull-Garland.6
atsarya shyön karsal dzum
The youthful ācārya has a light complexion and is smiling.
hérukapa chang dril trol
He appears in the form of a heruka and plays a small skull-drum and bell.
damtsik yeshe nyi sumé
The samaya and wisdom deities are indivisible.
gompa tsam gyi ngödrub tob
Merely by meditating on them I gain accomplishment.
Arouse stable pride that the samaya and wisdom being are indivisible, and focus the mind one
pointedly on a clear appearance of the deities of infinite purity.
The Visualization for Recitation
rangnyi khandrö tukka ru
I am the ḍākinī. In my heart
pakmo ting nak dri töchen
Is Vārāhī, dark blue in colour and holding a hooked knife and skull-cup.
nying ü ga khyil bam tsen tar
In her heart is a coil of joy, in the centre of which is the syllable vaṃ,
ngak treng khorwé özer gyi
Encircled by the mantra garland. It revolves, emitting light rays that
lha kü nang shyen salwar jé
Illuminate and enhance the appearance of the deities
rikdak lamé tuk gyü kul
It invokes the wisdom mind of the guru, the lord of the families,
dé lé ö trödön nyi jé
Who sends out light rays that accomplish the two benefits.
lamé ku lé dütsi gyün
From the guru’s body, a stream of ambrosia,
zakmé dewa chenpor bab
Undefiled great bliss, flows down.
gawa shyi yi jelé kyi
Through the power of the four blisses
wang shyi yeshe nyam su nyong
The primordial wisdom of the four empowerments is experienced.
om padmo yogini jnana varahi hung
oṃ padmo-yoginī-jñāna-vārāhī hūṃ
With this, one ‘nests the three beings’7. The twelve syllables of the vajra root mantra are
as follows. ‘Oṁ’ is the vanguard of the mantra. ‘Padmo yoginī’ is the commitment being. ‘Jñāna
vārāhī’ is the name of the wisdom being. At the end of the mantra comes ‘hūṁ’, which
invokes the accomplishment of the three vajras. Apply awareness and recite as much as you
can. Visualize the radiating and absorbing of light rays. The way in which the wisdom of the
vast expanse should be maintained and so forth should be known from other texts.
Then recite the following all-embodying mantra of the peaceful and wrathful deities as well.
om guhya jnana bodhi tsitta maha sukha rulu rulu hung jo hung
oṃ guhya-jñāna bodhicitta-mahāsukha rulu rulu hūṃ bhyo hūṃ
In the heart of the principal deity of the body maṇḍala8 is a locket of the sun and moon, inside
of which is an a syllable surrounded by the mantra garland. Visualize this while radiating
and absorbing light rays.
When you emerge from the session, recite the vowels and consonants, the mantra of interdependent
origination and the hundred syllable mantra. With this, duplications and omissions are
amended and the blessings remain firmly.
Dissolution and re-emergence
Then, the appearance of the deity arises as the deity of luminosity:
ho, chu lé chubur dolwa shyin
Hoḥ! Like bubbles appearing on water,
rang lé trulpé kyilkhor lha
The deities of the maṇḍala, created by myself,
yeshe ying su benza mu
Dissolve into the all-pervading space of primordial wisdom—vajra muḥ!
Rest in meditation. Then again:
jetob gyumé lha kur dang
In the post-meditation, everything arises as the illusory body of the deity.
Arise as the deity in the breaks.
gewa di yi nyurdu dak
Through the merit of this practice may I swiftly
dorjé tsünmo drub gyur né
Accomplish the Vajra Queen,
drowa chik kyang malüpa
And so every single sentient being, without exception,
dé yi sa la göpar shok
Be led to that perfect state as well!
And so forth, ornament the conclusion with prayers of dedication and aspiration. By merely doing
this practice birth, death and the intermediate state will be transformed into the three
kāyas. Because the crucial points of the unsurpassable Vajrayāna’s skilful means are included
here in an excellent way, if you prefer to keep it short, then at any time except
the 10th and the 25th days of the lunar calendar,9 you may take this practice as your yidam
deity.

This was written by Jikme Tengyal, a crazy beggar who sustains himself with the nectar-like
words of the omniscient guru, at Dzongsar Tashi Lhatse. May virtue and auspiciousness abound!

| Translated by Han Kop and edited by Jeremy Tattersall, 2019.

Source: 'jigs med bstan pa'i nyi ma. "rig 'dzin yum ka'i rgyun khyer/" in rDo grub chen ’jigs
med bstan pa’i nyi ma’i gsung ’bum. 7 vols. Chengdu: Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2003.
TBRC: W25007, vol. 5: 14–20
↑ In English ‘Homage to Yeshe Tsogyal!’↑ Tib. tiklé nyakchik; thig le nyag gcig.↑ Tib. chang
té'u↑ Skt. puṇḍarīka↑ The Illuminating the Meaning of Tantra: A Commentary on the Sādhana
of Yumka, the Queen of Great Bliss, by Ratön Ngawang Tendzin Dorje (in short called the Ratik
commentary), says these are: 1) a bone ring for the crown, 2) earrings, 3) a necklace,
4) anklets and bracelets for the ankles, wrists and upper arms, 5) a girdle and 6) a sacred
Brahmanic thread.↑ Tib. Pema Tötreng Tsal, in other words, Padmasambhava↑ The three nested
beings are the commitment being (Skt. samayasattva), the wisdom being (Skt. jñānasattva)
and the meditation being (Skt. samādhisattva).↑ That is, the wisdom deity↑ Literally ‘the
two tenth days’, meaning the 10th day of the lunar calendar and the 10th day of the new
moon (the 15th day), which is the 25th. On these two days one practises the full-length
sādhana, which includes the tsok offering.