Yumka Fulfilment Practice
by the Third Dodrupchen Jigme Tenpe Nyima

Namo guru-mañjughoṣa-jñāna-jinendraye!
If you wish to fulfil the wisdom minds of the deities in the maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī Queen
of Great Bliss, arrange the offering substances and bless them in the usual way.
Blessing the Offerings
nama sarva tathagaté bayo bisho mukhebé sarva takham utgaté saparana imam gagana kham soha
namaḥ sarvatathāgatebhyo viśva-mukhebhyaḥ sarvathā-khaṃ udgate spharaṇa imaṃ gagana-khaṃ svāhā
benza saparana kham
vajra-spharaṇa khaṃ
Then, accompanied by music and a melodious chant:
ho, zungdzin chö kün nyukmé shi su tim
Hoḥ!  All dualistic phenomena dissolve into the original state,
kadak rigpa ying kyi lhum su shyuk
And primordially pure awareness enters the womb of all-encompassing space.1
ying rik yermé gyuntrul drawé trin
The union of all-encompassing space and awareness is the cloud of the illusory net.2
nangsi tamché chöpé chakgya ché
All that appears and exists arises as the mudrā of great offering.
ngaden pemo drawé yeshe shying
Within the pure wisdom realm of the Lotus Net, endowed with the five qualities,
ta ü mepar dalwé long kyil na
The all-pervading expanse without centre or periphery, are arranged:
namdak dütsi chöyön shyabsil dang
Offering water for drinking and washing, made of pure ambrosia,3
dorjé metok dukpa marmé dri
Vajra flowers, incense, lights, scented water,
shyalzé rolmö nyerchö puljung dang
Food and music—daily offerings of excellent quality;
shyalmé khang tsek rinchen pungpé ri
Palaces and mountains of heaped jewels,
paksam naktsal mamö lotok tuk
Forests of wish-fulfilling trees and an abundance of uncultivated crops,
rinchen nyewé rinchen dün dün dang
The seven emblems of royalty and the seven secondary emblems,
gelek charbeb tashi dzé tak gyé
Rains of goodness made from the eight auspicious substances and symbols;
pemé lak chok zuk duk yang nyen dang
Hosts of youthful goddesses with lotus-like hands, eyes wide open like uṭpala flowers,
dri shyim ro da lhadzé rekja yi
Stunningly perfect looks and harmonious voices.
lek tsen lhamo utpal mik yang tsok
Hold delightful fragrances, delicious foods, and exquisite silk clothing that represents the
sense of touch;
dawa nyima tabshé zungjuk pé
The supreme medicine, the ‘great red’ rakta, and bali
rangshyin men chok mar chen balingta
That possess the nature of the moon and sun, the union of skilful means and wisdom;4
chok gi döyön gyutsal drukchu shyi
Hosts of consorts of the Lotus family who are expert in the sixty-four arts
tar sön pechen chakgyé duwa sok
And who grant supreme sensual pleasure, and so on—
nampa künden jorwé chagé rer
Every offering substance of this great abundance
dechen rimö nyamgyur bum dzokpé
Contains hundred of thousands of expressions of great bliss.
kunzang chötrin rabjam ying kyi gyen
These infinite offering clouds, like Samantabhadra’s, adorn the sky;
dakpé mö ngor chikchar salwa di
For those with pure perception, they appear instantaneously and vividly. By making these offerings,
zungjuk kyilkhor gyatsö khyabdak ché
Great mistress who presides over infinite maṇḍalas of union,
ying yum dorjé pakmö tukdam kang
Vajravārāhī, mother of space, may your wishes be fulfilled!

né sum khandro yong kyi khorlö gyur
Universal monarch of the ḍākinīs of the three abodes,
dé gyal pemo yogi tukdam kang
Queen of Bliss, Lotus Yoginī, may your wishes be fulfilled!

jinlab jungné kagyü lamé tso
Source of blessings and foremost of the gurus of the instruction lineage,
rikdak pema tötreng tukdam kang
Lord of the family, Lotus Skull Garland,5 may your wishes be fulfilled!

dorjé tsünmö chi nang shyen sum chö
The outer, inner and other dharmas of the vajra queen6
duldral yeshe ying su ronyam cha
Are of equal taste in the immaculate, all-encompassing space of primordial wisdom.7
drenpé pung kham kyemché yangdak tar
Merely by recollecting you, you purify the aggregates, elements and sense sources into their
final, perfect state.
jongdzé shyitro rik gyé tukdam kang
Hundred Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, may your wishes be fulfilled!

khyepar tsa lung tiklé ösal long
In particular, you who seal the channels, wind-energies and vital essences in the luminous expanse,
gyé deb khorlo sum kyil tukdam kang
Maṇḍalas of the three wheels, may your wishes be fulfilled!

khachö tummo lasok tuk khor dak
Mistresses of the mind wheel’s sky dwellers, Caṇḍākṣī and others,
yeshe pawor ché nam tukdam kang
Together with your heroes8 of wisdom, may your wishes be fulfilled!

sachö sasung ma sok sung khor dak
Mistresses of the speech wheel’s earth dwellers, Airāvatī and others,
yeshe pawor ché nam tukdam kang
Together with your heroes of wisdom, may your wishes be fulfilled!

sa ok khorlö shuk sok ku khor dak
Mistresses of the body wheel’s subterranean dwellers, Cakravarmiṇī and others,
yeshe pawor ché nam tukdam kang
Together with your heroes of wisdom, may your wishes be fulfilled!

dedak namtrul rirab dultren nyé
Your emanations as numerous as the atoms of Mount Meru,
khadroma pal lhatsok tukdam kang
Throngs of glorious ḍākinīs, may your wishes be fulfilled!

dorjé lü dang chirol kyilkhor gyi
Hosts of yoginīs of the maṇḍalas of the vajra body and external places,
naljorma tsok gyepa kong gyur né
May you be pleased and your wishes be fulfilled! As a result of these prayers
tuk dang galwé nyamchak münpa sang
May the darkness of impairments and breakages that displease you be dispelled,
yeshe nangwé dak gyü salwar shok
May my mind be illuminated by the light of primordial wisdom,
chir nang yul kün tsok kyi longchö du
And by the power of experiencing all appearances and objects as the enjoyment of the feast,
rolwé detong tokpé tsal bar té
May the realization of bliss and emptiness blaze forth,
duwa sum dang barwa nam sum sok
And may accomplishments such as the three gatherings9 and the three blazings,10
ngödrub yar gyi tso tar pelwar shok
Increase like a summer lake!

tartuk pung kham nyikma ying su dak
Finally, may the dregs of the aggregates and elements be purified in all-encompassing space,
mishik dangma yeshe chü kyi min
And ripen into the indestructible, pure distillate of quintessential, primordial wisdom!11
tongpé kha la jé chak dang shar té
May the radiance of compassion shine in the sky of emptiness,
zungjuk pakmö gopang nyur drub shok
And may we swiftly attain the state of union of Vajravārāhī!

shyenyang rimé gyalten shedrub pel
Furthermore, may the study and practice of the Victorious One’s non-sectarian teachings flourish,
dé dzin shyabten trinlé chok tar khyab
May the holders of those teachings live long, and their enlightened activities spread everywhere
in all directions,
dro kün pendé gé tsen dar bab shing
May the virtuous signs of freedom and happiness for all beings increase,
chamchik chokngö drubpé tashi shok
And may all be auspicious so that all beings, together, attain the supreme accomplishment!

A supplementary note on the term fulfilment:
The term ‘fulfilment’12 is explained as follows. If we distinguish between the feast and the
fulfilment offering, then the feast offering is mainly a practice of pleasing the guru and
the deities of the maṇḍala with the nectar of food and drink. Then, the fulfilment is so
called, because it perfectly pleases or satisfies the deities by means of the blessing of
a vast wealth of sensual delights created by the mind and those actually arranged. This is
how the difference between feast and fulfilment can be understood. Furthermore, it also
refers to the purification based on the vast practice of the instructions on the “great remorseful
purification” of the faults of broken samaya which earn the displeasure of the deities
of the maṇḍala. In this respect, “fulfilment” can be taken to mean the healing of one’s
own samaya or the healing of the wisdom minds of the deities. Generally, feast and fulfilment
are not entirely unrelated, as when the fulfilment of the elaborate is said to be
the ‘first portion’ offering in the maṇḍala ritual of the Assembly of the Deathless Three
Kāyas13 [of Sherab Özer].

At the request of the learned monk Jikmé Ösal, this was written by the crazy beggar Tenpe Nyima.
Maṅgalaṃ!

| Translated by Han Kop and edited by Jeremy Tattersall, 2019. The supplementary note on the
term fulfilment has been translated by Adam Pearcey. We are indebted to Tulku Thondup’s pioneering
translation of the text. With gratitude to Dakpo Tulku Rinpoche for his clarifications
and to Stefan Mang for his suggestions.
↑ Skt. dharmadhātu.↑ I.e., the deities of the Māyājāla.↑ Skt. amṛta↑ Dakpo Tulku Rinpoche says
that here, as in the fulfilment practice of the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities that Empty
the Lower Realms, appearance is the fulfilment of ambrosia, emptiness the fulfilment of
rakta, and their union the fulfilment of bali. So here the moon has the nature of medicine,
the sun of rakta, and union is bali.↑ I.e., Pema Tötreng, Padmasambhava.↑ Dakpo Tulku Rinpoche
says that here outer refers to the pure realms, inner to the cities of the ḍākas and
ḍākinīs, and other to ultimate reality. Or else outer refers to the  twenty-four places
and so forth, inner to elements of the vajra body such as the channels, and other to the state
where those have been actualised, the all-encompassing space of primordial wisdom.↑ Skt.
jñāna, Tib. yeshe. It can also be translated as ‘pristine cognition’.↑ Skt vīra; Tib.
pawo.↑ The three gatherings: 1) the gathering of people during the day, 2) the gathering of
ḍākinīs by night, and 3) the gathering of provisions at all times.↑ The three blazes are
blissful warmth in the body, power in speech and realization in the mind.↑ It is ambiguous
what exactly is doing the ripening here. However, in accordance with the common pair of
the ‘dregs’ (Tib. nyikma) and the ‘pure distillate’ (Tib. dangma), the pure distillate is
considered to be the desired end result.↑ Tib. kangwa; bskang ba.↑ Tib. chimé kusum düpa;
’chi med sku gsum ’dus pa.